docs: introduction chapter of arc42 documentation (#156)
GenSpectrum/LAPIS: docs/acr42/01_introduction_and_goals.md

This document follows the [arc42 template](https://arc42.org/).
# Introduction and Goals

This document describes LAPIS, which is a platform to give easy access to genomic sequence data alongside metadata of
the sequenced probes. It is used to filter sequence data and return the result to the user through web access, so the

> user can develop his/her own evaluation of the data. The current development is based on two existing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user can develop their own evaluation of the data. The current development is based on two existing
```
If we want to be gender neutral here, I think "their" is the preferred way in English.

> user can develop his/her own evaluation of the data. The current development is based on two existing

Reviewer: Strictly speaking, they are not "existing systems", are they? IMO it's a new system that's supposed to be a generalization of the existing API behind https://genspectrum.org/.

systems (LAPIS-api and SILO), which are developed for SarsCov2 viruses, and shall be extended to also include other
virus species.

The following goals have been established for this system:

| Priority |                                                            |
|----------|------------------------------------------------------------|

> | 1        | Include current functionality of LAPIS in the new approach |

Reviewer: "current functionality of LAPIS" = very efficient querying of large data sets of genomic sequences. So I would rather write that down, since in my understanding, that is the main goal, and it's independent of the existing system. Maybe the exact formulation has to be sharpened a bit though.

I would maybe also reformulate the second prio item to something like "Provide the infrastructure such that it is easy for other researchers to setup an instance for data of other virus species".

@chaoran-chen Is "virus species" actually the correct term here? That will probably appear throughout the whole document, so we should align on a term here.

| 2        | Provide simple setup for new virus species                 |
| 3        |                                                            |

## Requirements Overview

| Id  | Requirement                |                                                                                                      |
|-----|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| F1  | create user instance       | create user instance of the whole system by given configuration for different virus species          |
| F2  | read in data               | read data provided as aligned and non-aligned sequence data for nucleotides and aminoacids, metadata |

> | F3  | store data                 | store data in compressed form and give fast access                                                   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| F3  | store data                 | store data in compressed form                                                  |
```
IMO access is a separate requirement. Compression is important enough as a standalone feature here.

> | F4  | provide web access to data | provide endpoint for custom queries to the data                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| F4  | provide web access to data | provide endpoints for custom queries to the data                                                      |
```

> | F5  | provide statstics          | provide statistics for usage of system                                                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| F5  | provide statstics          | provide statistics for usage of the system                                                               |
```

> ## Quality Goals

Reviewer: How much of this section do we actually need? I'm undecided what our key points here should be.

|                        | Reusability           | Welche Komponenten sollen auch getrennt benutzt werden können (database?)                                                             | Q:M2 |
|                        | Analysability         | Wie effektiv und effizient soll das fertige Produkt analysiert werden können?                                                         | Q:M3 |
|                        | Modifiability         | Welche Komponten sollen angepasst werden können? The (whole?) software should be easy to modify to cope with different virus species. | Q:M4 |
|                        | Testability           | All single components should be tested. The whole system is tested from starting an instance to the user query.                       | Q:M5 |

[//]: # (| Cultural and Regional? |)

[//]: # (| Legal?)

[//]: # (| Security?)

[//]: # ()

[//]: # (Scenarios:)

## Stakeholders

| Role                              | Expectations                                                           |
|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Database researcher (Alex)        | ?                                                                      |                                                                      

Reviewer: Do we want to list individual people here? Who actually owns the system? Is it you as individual people or the department as a whole?

| Alignment researcher (Cornelius)  | ?                                                                      |                                                                      
| Sequence researcher (Chaoran)     | ?                                                                      |                                                                    
| Financier (Tanja, DFG?)           | ?                                                                      |                                                                   

> | Maintainer                        | Can fix bugs and add new features to software.                         |                         
> | End-user                          | Can write queries to LAPIS and get a fast result.                      |                      
> | Research facility                 | Can host the software on their own servers for their own virus specie. | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Developer                        | Can fix bugs and add new features to software.                         |                         
| End-user                          | Can write queries to LAPIS and get a fast result.                      |                      
| Maintainer                        | A research facility that can host the software on their own servers for their own virus specie. | 
```
In my understanding, the "maintainer" is the one who runs the software in the end. At least that's what called it and also refer to it as in later chapters. But I'm open for a discussion on how to actually call them, since this also seems to be an important distinction.
